four position sizing formulas behind
winning in trading. Now, most traders
spend all their time obsessing over
entries and exits, but position sizing
is what actually determines whether you
make money or if you blow up. These are
the exact same methods I use across my
own automated trading portfolio. And
here are also the results uh
specifically in crypto over the past
couple of months. As we can see, I've
been outperforming BTC and mock by a
significant margin. We're actually up
around 13 to 15% depending on
volatility, while most of crypto is down
around 30 to even 40%. And it's all
really because I size my positions
correctly. Now, these principles also
help me run alos in the futures markets
that are fully automated using Ninja
Trader and a bit of code. Now, of
course, I'm not the only one saying
this, and I'm not the original founder
to to realize position sizing is a huge
part of trading. Let's actually listen
to a hedge fund manager and how he says
position sizing is the core of trading.
>> To me, this is like the the two most
important things, especially between
tournament poker and and and uh and
trading are are patience and and bet
sizing, right? And you know, if you've
got pocket aces, you don't want to have
your life savings at risk as a 4 to1
favorite cuz one out of five times
you're bankrupt. Um, and the same thing
goes in trading. But I promise you, it
can always go to a more obscene level.
And so you want to make sure that, you
know, that that you're not in a position
where if it moves against you more than
you think that you are stopped out uh,
you know, blowing up, whatever you want
to call it, um, where you know, where
where you're done.
>> And he's completely right. You can have
the best strategy in the world, but if
you size your positions wrong, you will
lose money. And if you size them right,
even an average strategy can compound
for years. So, in this video, I'm going
to break down the four position sizing
methods that actually matter, when to
use each one, and the one rule that
matters more than any formula. So, let's
get straight into it.
Now, method one, let's start with the
foundation, and this is fixed percentage
position sizing. This is where most
traders start and the idea is very
simple. You risk a fixed percentage of
your account on every single trade. So,
for example, if you had an $80,000
account, you'd risk 2%, for example, and
that would be 1,600. The math is dead
simple. And the position sizing
basically just equals your account value
times your risk percentage. That's it.
Now, why does this work so well? It's
because it does two things at once. When
you're winning, your position sizing
grows so you compound faster. And when
you're losing, your position sizing
shrinks so you can protect your original
capital, making it self-correcting. Now,
the downside is is that it treats every
trade the same. It doesn't care if
you're trading Bitcoin which moves 5% a
day or some boring bond ETF that barely
moves. It doesn't account for how
confident you are in that trade as well.
Everything gets the same percentage
whether that be 1 2% etc. Now at least
for myself I normally use about 1 to 2%
of account as a baseline. Now this is
normally for strategies where I don't
have a more advanced method or maybe
they don't need a more advanced method.
Overall method one it's very simple it's
effective and most importantly it keeps
you alive if you stick to it.
Now method two this one is called equal
waiting. This one shifts from thinking
about individual trades and to thinking
about your portfolio as a whole. So
instead of sizing each trade separately,
you divide your capital equally among
all your positions. Well, this can
either be based on positions or it can
be based on strategies. But in this
case, let's say you have 10 positions.
If each one gets 10% of your capital,
and if you have five positions, each get
20% of your capital. This is also
another way of people looking at it. You
know, if you were creating a portfolio,
you could sometimes weight it by market
cap. But in this case, when we're
particularly talking about position
sizing, normally we're going to be
dividing capital across them. Just to
give you a very easy example, if you
have $100,000, you divide that across 10
positions, $10,000 per each asset or per
strategy if you had 10 strategies. Now,
this works really well when you're
running a diversified portfolio of
uncorrelated strategies. And it makes it
very easy. You don't have to overthink
it. You can just run clean exposure
across everything. The big advantage
here is that it forces diversification.
You can't accidentally concentrate all
your capital into one position. It's
also very transparent and easy to
explain and it does reduce correlation
risk a bit because you're equally
divided between everything. So you're
not having, you know, one position that
just has 80 grand, for example, of your
100K. But the downside is the same
problems as really the fixed percentage.
It completely ignores volatility. So a
100% volatility asset is going to get
the same allocation as a 20% volatility
asset. So even though your dollar
amounts are equal, your actual risk
exposure is completely unbalanced. And
this is a problem we're going to try and
solve with method four. And also you
you'll realize I said one word and this
is very important for equal waiting is
uncorrelated. If you have correlated uh
strategies or correlated assets for
example equal waiting method isn't
really going to be ideal most of the
time. The reason being is that if
they're let's say fully correlated right
so one that means if you have 10 grand
in one position and you have 10 grand in
another position. Technically you kind
of have double exposure cuz you'd have
like 20 grand in that position because
it's fully correlated. Meaning if one
goes up the other one goes up. If the
other one goes down the other one goes
down. Which means you're basically
losing double the amount. But if they
are uncorrelated or at least low
correlation, then equal waiting can be a
pretty good method.
Now, method number three is the Kelly
criterion. This one sounds amazing on
paper and a lot of people like to
reference it, but it's actually quite
dangerous in practice. To give you some
backstory, Kelly was developed in the
1950s at Bell Labs. It was originally
designed to optimize signal to noise
ratios in telecommunication. Then
gamblers discovered it and started using
it for poker, blackjack, and has also
made its way into trading. Now, the
formula primarily calculates the
theoretical optimal position size to
maximize your long-term capital growth.
It takes your win rate, your average
win, your average loss. It tells you
exactly what percentage of your capital
should be at risk. Now, if you want to
see the actual math, this is a very
popular uh Kelly criteria formula.
Primarily, all it really does is it
equals your win rate times your win loss
ratio plus one minus one and all the
divided by the win loss ratio. So, let's
say you have a 60% win rate, [snorts]
your average win is $300 and your
average loss is $150. That gives you a
win- loss ratio of two. You plug that
into the Kelly criterion and it tells
you that you're probably going to risk
around 40% of your capital on one
particular trade. And that's the exact
problem with Kelly. It's mathematically
optimal if you have perfect information.
Nobody does really in trading. So, the
first reason why this method often fails
in trading is it's extremely sensitive
to input errors. If you think a win
rate, for example, is 60%. Maybe you've
done a really good back test. It's a
5-year back test and it's it's told you
it's actually 60%. But actually, maybe
there was some missing data or you
didn't, you know, back test it correctly
and your win rate is actually 55%, Kelly
just told you to overlever by almost
like 50%. This small estimation errors
translates into massive sizing mistakes.
And then this leads into the second
issue. It assumes your edge is constant.
Your win rate, for example, in 2023 is
not going to be the same as 2024.
Markets change, regimes change, and your
edges often decay. And then lastly, even
with a real edge, Kelly can produce 50%
plus drawdowns. Most traders can't
physically handle that. Three bad trades
in a row and at 40% risk, you're
basically done. That isn't going to be a
recipe for long-term growth. Now, if you
do get lucky, if you have a very high
win rate strategy, for example, you
could compound your account beyond any
extreme that most um traditional sizing
methods would be even possible to do.
So, you are taking this risk.
Ultimately, you are just kind of trading
high leverage in in some aspects cuz
you're just sizing every position so
high. But I do know some traders that
have grown, you know, very decent
sizable account from this method and
then have switched to a very
conservative sizing method like you know
1% 2%. Now this also leads to what some
people use Kelly for. They call it
fractional Kelly. Typically this is a
quarter to a half of what the formula
actually recommends. But the irony kind
of comes out that if you're using
quarter Kelly, you're just going to end
up at around 5 to 10% risk for a trade.
And at that point, you could basically
just use a more aggressive version of
the fixed percentage sizing. You don't
really need to be using Kelly in that
case. Now the theoretical appeal is very
strong for Kelly but the practical
implementation in trading is kind of a
nightmare because we don't have perfect
information whereas in blackjack and for
example even been in poker you kind of
have closer to perfect information
whereas in trading you really never get
close to it. Now the only scenario where
it might make sense to run and I have
heard and and read papers that have done
it is a very high frequency strategy
with thousands of trades per year or
even per month and because of the volume
of the amount of trades their
statistical probabilities are very
robust where it means they could maybe
use the Kelly formula for this. Uh I
haven't seen that many people do it but
I've definitely read a couple of papers
where they said they mentioned it.
However, I would say for most traders,
unless you are obviously a very riskone
trader, I would probably ignore the
Kelly criterion, but it could be a
method to at least be aware of.
Now, method number four, and it's
primarily the method I use in most of my
strategies. This method kind of ties
everything together that we've been
talking about, and it's called
volatility targeting. Instead of sizing
based on dollars or fixed percentage,
you size based on how much risk each
position actually contributes to your
portfolio. So, high volatility assets
get small positions, lower volatility
assets get larger positions. The goal is
that every position contributes roughly
equal risk. So, let me give you an
example and also show you why this
matters. Let's say you have $10,000 in
Bitcoin, which has around 80% annualized
volatility, and $10,000 in Apple, which
is around 30% volatility. These numbers
are both made up. Apple, I think, is a
lot lower than 30%, but let's say it is
for this. Now, your dollar amounts are
equal. You have 10,000 each position,
but your risk is completely unequal.
Bitcoin is going to be probably
contributing around three times more the
risk to your portfolio than Apple is
going to be. that's not balanced in any
way and also maybe you didn't intend to
want to have Bitcoin, you know,
contributing three times more of the
risk. So, this becomes slowly a hidden
concentration problem. Volatility
targeting is a way to fix this. There
are a few ways to implement it, so I'll
guide you through each one. The simplest
is using ATR. This just stands for the
average true range. It's a very common
indicator and you can pretty much load
it up on Trading View or really any
market or really any platform. ATR
measures how much an asset typically
moves per day. So, you take the risk per
trade and divide it by ATR to get your
position size. So in volatile markets
ATR goes up and your position
automatically gets smaller. In calm
markets ATR goes down and your position
naturally gets larger. It's a very easy
self-adjusting uh method to use. Another
approach is percent volatility model.
This is where you take your account
value times a risk percentage and divide
it by that assets and volatility. So if
you have a $100,000 account for example
and you have 2% risk and that asset has
40% volatility, your position size is
around $5,000. If that volatility then
doubles to 80% annualized volatility,
then you could automatically reduce your
position to around 2,500. And then
lastly, there's also fixed percentage
with volatility adjustment. This is
where you start with a base allocation,
for example, like 10% of the capital
that scales inversely to volatility. If
so, if you have high volatility assets,
let's say at 60%, that might get around
$5,000 while a low volatility asset at
maybe 15 gets $20,000. low volatility
asset gets around four times the capital
because it contributes less risk per
dollar, meaning you can size bigger in
that particular position. And this is
also a great case where you want to set
a target volatility for your portfolio.
So a lot of the times, especially in our
crypto models, I'll normally want to
have x percentage volatility that I'm
targeting as that is something I'm
capable and happy to uh kind of like
take on for that portfolio. Now to
actually calculate volatility, the
standard approach, there are a couple of
different ways, but the most standard is
just to take the daily returns over the
past 20 trading days. Calculate the
standard deviation and annualize it by
multiplying it by the square root of 252
for equities and futures or by 365 for
crypto just because crypto is always
trading. Now, this is the most
sophisticated method on the list, but
it's essential when you're trading
multiple asset classes and when you want
to run a diversified portfolio,
especially if it's going to be an
automated portfolio, whether that be in
futures, crypto, etc. Also, it's a
really key thing to keep in mind.
volatility is constantly changing in all
these markets. So, you do want to have a
way where your position sizing, you
know, checks for that. For example,
we've had the crazy oil volatility come
in because of the war in Iran and uh
that's also why this terrible setup I
had to get away from Dubai for at least
a couple of weeks and I'm just currently
in an Airbnb with my laptop. All of that
actual volatility obviously in my life
and also in the markets causes where you
want to reduce your position sizes
automatically and that's something where
I'm very lucky cuz I have automated
trading that automatically is just
updated for me. Now, one last rule that
you cannot break with this is that it
doesn't matter what formula you're using
or a formula I've shown you. If losing a
trade makes you afraid to take the next
trading signal, you've sized way too
big. If you want to do revenge trading
because of one particular loss, you've
sized way too big. If it makes you
question your entire system and your
entire strategy, you've sized way too
big. The perfect position size is one
that lets you execute the strategy
without emotional interference. Now,
obviously, that can be helped with
automation, but ideally, you never want
to be sized so big that it's going to
change the way you trade. And often
that's why actually trading smaller is
uh what the math suggests and it's also
better for you uh emotionally.